Header
======

Use the header to let the user know where they are, what they can do,
and where they can go inside your application.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/8ec7cc1c-750w_Header_Orientation-3.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_Orientation (3)

   750w\_Header\_Orientation (3)

-  `Usage › <#usage>`__

-  `Slots › <#slots>`__

-  `Toolbar › <#toolbar>`__

-  `Edit mode › <#edit-mode>`__

-  `Responsive layout › <#responsive-layout>`__

-  `Header appearance › <#header-appearance>`__

-  `Header section › <#header-section>`__

-  `Best practices › <#best-practices>`__

+------+--------+
| |no  | The    |
| alt  | `Heade |
| text | r      |
| |    | API <. |
|      | ./../a |
|      | pi-qml |
|      | -curre |
|      | nt/Ubu |
|      | ntu.Co |
|      | mponen |
|      | ts.Hea |
|      | der.md |
|      | >`__   |
|      | includ |
|      | es     |
|      | the    |
|      | expose |
|      | d,     |
|      | flicka |
|      | ble    |
|      | and    |
|      | moving |
|      | proper |
|      | ties   |
|      | of the |
|      | header |
|      | .      |
+======+========+
+------+--------+

Usage
-----

The header area can contain the main navigation options and actions
inside your app. It is used to enhance the user experience in specific
device layouts.

When should I use a header?
---------------------------

-  If your app has multiple sections

-  If your app performs an action that requires the full screen, such as
   a camera, then don’t use a header.

Multiple panels may appear when the surface or window increases in size.
When this happens, each panel can contain its own header. For example,
on a mobile surface, one panel is present at a time as the pages are
stacked on top of each other in a hierarchical order. However, when
translated onto a medium to large surface the panels become adjacent to
each other and will contain their own header, while still remaining in a
hierarchical order.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/8311396f-366w_Header_Usage1panel.png
   :alt: l

   l

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/0d024d94-750w_Header_Usage2panels.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_Usage2panels

   750w\_Header\_Usage2panels

-  **Navigational options **\ on the left

The navigation area can include a Back Button, title, a subtitle or a
navigation drawer for when there is no room to fit all buttons for major
views.

-  **Actions **\ on the right

The action area can include actions such as settings, search, views, or
an action drawer for when there’s no room to place further actions.

+------+--------+
| |no  | Don’t  |
| alt  | use a  |
| text | naviga |
| |    | tion   |
|      | drawer |
|      | and an |
|      | action |
|      | drawer |
|      | at the |
|      | same   |
|      | time,  |
|      | becaus |
|      | e      |
|      | users  |
|      | are    |
|      | unlike |
|      | ly     |
|      | to     |
|      | distin |
|      | guish  |
|      | betwee |
|      | n      |
|      | them.  |
+======+========+
+------+--------+

Slots
-----

The header contains a number of slots that can hold actions or
navigational options. Depending on the surface or window size,
additional slots can be added to show the actions otherwise hidden in
drawers.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/bc59f393-750w_Header_HeaderComponents.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_HeaderComponents

   750w\_Header\_HeaderComponents

+------+--------+
| |no  | Think  |
| alt  | about  |
| text | the    |
| |    | most   |
|      | import |
|      | ant    |
|      | action |
|      | s      |
|      | and    |
|      | views  |
|      | you    |
|      | want   |
|      | the    |
|      | user   |
|      | to     |
|      | perfor |
|      | m      |
|      | and    |
|      | make   |
|      | it     |
|      | easy   |
|      | for    |
|      | them   |
|      | to     |
|      | find   |
|      | by     |
|      | using  |
|      | the    |
|      | header |
|      | .      |
+======+========+
+------+--------+

For smaller surfaces, such as on mobile, the SDK provides a maximum of
four slots per header that can be arranged in two ways.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/1340e785-750w_Header_Slots-2.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_Slots (2)

   750w\_Header\_Slots (2)

Slot arrangement
----------------

Slots can be arranged in a variety of ways to surface actions and
navigational options to best suit the user experience of your
application.

Slot A
------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/625656cf-366w_Header_SlotAexample1-3.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_SlotAexample1 (3)

   366w\_Header\_SlotAexample1 (3)

-  First position on the left hand side

-  When slot A is not needed, slot B should move to this position

-  A navigation drawer can displays all main views in an application

Slot B
------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/132ac0cf-366w_Header_SlotBexample1-3.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_SlotBexample1 (3)

   366w\_Header\_SlotBexample1 (3)

-  Mandatory title of your app or view, only one line

-  An optional subtitle can sit below the title, which can be two lines

Slot C
------

Slot C can have any action inside it, such as ‘Add new contact’ or a
‘Call’ action.

Search
------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/d9aca9a6-366w_Header_SlotCexample1-3.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_SlotCexample1 (3)

   366w\_Header\_SlotCexample1 (3)

If you are using Slot C for Settings, then it should always be
positioned last.

Settings
--------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/f645dd1d-366w_Header_SlotCexample2-2-1.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_SlotCexample2 (2)

   366w\_Header\_SlotCexample2 (2)

If you are using Slot C to place a Search icon, or any other action,
then place it to the right of the title.

Action drawer
-------------

An action drawer can be used for when no other slots are available to
show them. However, when your app is on a larger surface, like on a
desktop, then actions will appear in the slots.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/601b7473-366w_Header_ActionDrawerExpanded-1.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_ActionDrawerExpanded (1)

   366w\_Header\_ActionDrawerExpanded (1)

Responsive layout
-----------------

As the header gains width across screen sizes, additional slots become
visible and actions in the drawer will appear automatically.

3 slot layout
-------------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/407df52e-Header_SlotArrangement1-2.png
   :alt: Header\_SlotArrangement1 (2)

   Header\_SlotArrangement1 (2)

4 slot layout
-------------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/bf9f7a5f-Header_SlotArrangement2-2.png
   :alt: Header\_SlotArrangement2 (2)

   Header\_SlotArrangement2 (2)

5 slot layout
-------------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/ed3d7a0b-Header_SlotArrangement3-2.png
   :alt: Header\_SlotArrangement3 (2)

   Header\_SlotArrangement3 (2)

6 slot layout
-------------

|Header\_SlotArrangement4 (3)| |Header\_SlotArrangement5 (2)|

Medium to large screens
-----------------------

The maximum number of visible action slots in a convergent environment
is 6. If this is exceeded then additional actions will migrate to the
action drawer.

+------+--------+
| |no  | If     |
| alt  | your   |
| text | header |
| |    | has no |
|      | more   |
|      | slots  |
|      | for    |
|      | action |
|      | s,     |
|      | then   |
|      | everyt |
|      | hing   |
|      | after  |
|      | Slot D |
|      | goes   |
|      | into   |
|      | Slot E |
|      | inside |
|      | an     |
|      | action |
|      | drawer |
|      | .      |
+======+========+
+------+--------+

Search inside the header
------------------------

You can use search within the main header to filter the currently
displayed content; or as a global search.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/6ee0744c-750w_Header_HeaderSearchV2-4.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_HeaderSearchV2 (4)

   750w\_Header\_HeaderSearchV2 (4)

Multi-panel layout
------------------

Search can appear in both panels when two or more headers are present.
For example, in a mail client you may want a filter for your inbox in
the first panel, and a search in the second panel to find a recipient.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/3a50895d-750W_Header_Convergence-search-1.png
   :alt: 750W\_Header\_Convergence search (1)

   750W\_Header\_Convergence search (1)

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/65192f75-750w_Header_Convergence-search-box-1.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_Convergence search box (1)

   750w\_Header\_Convergence search box (1)

Avoid placing search in both panels unless necessary, because it could
confuse the user as to what content is being filter. For example, they
may type in the wrong field to search for a specific query if it isn’t
in a hierarchical order.

+------+--------+
| |no  | Find   |
| alt  | more   |
| text | inform |
| |    | ation  |
|      | on     |
|      | search |
|      | in the |
|      | header |
|      | see    |
|      | Naviga |
|      | tion   |
|      | (comin |
|      | g      |
|      | soon). |
+======+========+
+------+--------+

Toolbar
-------

The toolbar is an additional component that can be used to hold actions.

+------+--------+
| |no  | The    |
| alt  | `Toolb |
| text | ar     |
| |    | API <. |
|      | ./../a |
|      | pi-qml |
|      | -curre |
|      | nt/Ubu |
|      | ntu.Co |
|      | mponen |
|      | ts.Too |
|      | lbar.m |
|      | d>`__  |
|      | allows |
|      | you to |
|      | determ |
|      | ine    |
|      | the    |
|      | action |
|      | or     |
|      | option |
|      | s      |
|      | you    |
|      | want   |
|      | to     |
|      | displa |
|      | y      |
|      | in the |
|      | toolba |
|      | r.     |
+======+========+
+------+--------+

Edit mode
---------

Edit mode allows users to modify a particular item or multiple items at
once. To enter edit mode users can initiate it by directly interacting
with a list item, title or card, or through an action inside the header.

When should I use edit mode?
----------------------------

Use a separate edit mode if making the information editable all the time
would substantially interfere with viewing, copying, or other tasks. For
example, in the Notes app, if a note were editable all the time then the
OSK would take up valuable reading space, and hyperlinks in notes would
be hard to click or tap.

A toolbar can be used below the header to provide additional actions
associated with editing. When editing content the actions that appear
inside the main header and toolbar are relevant to an edit state
allowing the user to perform tasks on the content, such as: select,
rearrange or delete.

Use cases
---------

#Actions in the header ‐ picking and editing content
----------------------------------------------------

If a primary action of your app is to allow users to select and move
content in a list, such as a list of contacts, then surface the editing
action inside the main header.

Once the user has initiated the editing action, the toolbar will appear
below the header with the associated editing actions for the content.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/364bc3c2-366w_Header_EditInHeader1-5.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_EditInHeader1 (5)

   366w\_Header\_EditInHeader1 (5)

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/1b4486ee-366w_Header_EditInHeader2-3.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_EditInHeader2 (3)

   366w\_Header\_EditInHeader2 (3)

If you only use one text button then place it on the left hand side,
because it will be easier for the user to reach with one gesture.

+------+--------+
| |no  | The    |
| alt  | toolba |
| text | r      |
| |    | can    |
|      | contai |
|      | n      |
|      | additi |
|      | onal   |
|      | action |
|      | s      |
|      | other  |
|      | than   |
|      | editin |
|      | g      |
|      | ones,  |
|      | such   |
|      | as     |
|      | ‘Share |
|      | ’      |
|      | or     |
|      | ‘Forwa |
|      | rd’.   |
+======+========+
+------+--------+

Edit mode in a multi-panel layout
---------------------------------

Edit mode can be triggered through an action in the header or
right-clicking or long-pressing the contextual menu.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/c341714c-750w_Header_MultiPanelLayout1-4.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_MultiPanelLayout1 (4)

   750w\_Header\_MultiPanelLayout1 (4)

An activated edit mode must always apply to the panel view it is
triggered in. It should not affect any other panels.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/bd08ea1b-750w_Header_MultiPanelLayout2-2.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_MultiPanelLayout2 (2)

   750w\_Header\_MultiPanelLayout2 (2)

If you need a delete icon place it on the left of the toolbar. If the
content you are editing needs to be saved then use two text buttons
instead, such as ‘Cancel’ and ‘Save’.

+------+--------+
| |no  | Place  |
| alt  | negati |
| text | ve     |
| |    | action |
|      | s      |
|      | on the |
|      | left   |
|      | and    |
|      | positi |
|      | ve     |
|      | action |
|      | s      |
|      | on the |
|      | right  |
|      | in the |
|      | main   |
|      | header |
|      | for    |
|      | consis |
|      | tency  |
|      | across |
|      | the    |
|      | platfo |
|      | rm.    |
|      | See    |
|      | `Desig |
|      | n      |
|      | values |
|      |  <../g |
|      | et-sta |
|      | rted/d |
|      | esign- |
|      | values |
|      | .md>`_ |
|      | _      |
|      | for    |
|      | more   |
|      | inform |
|      | ation. |
+======+========+
+------+--------+

Toolbar placement
-----------------

The toolbar appears below the main header when edit mode is initiated.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/301fcba0-750w_Header_ToolBar-1.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_ToolBar (1)

   750w\_Header\_ToolBar (1)

1. Main header

2. Toolbar

Header appearance
-----------------

You can decide how you want the header to appear in four ways: Fixed,
Fixed and Opaque, Fixed and Transparent and Hidden.

+------+--------+
| |no  | When a |
| alt  | header |
| text | is     |
| |    | displa |
|      | yed    |
|      | in a   |
|      | larger |
|      | surfac |
|      | e      |
|      | or a   |
|      | window |
|      | ,      |
|      | such   |
|      | as in  |
|      | a      |
|      | deskto |
|      | p,     |
|      | it     |
|      | will   |
|      | be     |
|      | fixed, |
|      | becaus |
|      | e      |
|      | there  |
|      | will   |
|      | be     |
|      | more   |
|      | room   |
|      | to     |
|      | displa |
|      | y      |
|      | conten |
|      | t.     |
+======+========+
+------+--------+

Fixed (default)
---------------

A fixed header will appear at all times until the user starts to scroll
down within your app’s content. Having a fixed header can be useful if
you have a few sections or actions that need to be accessible even when
the user scrolls. For instance, in a photo editing app the user may want
the editing tools to be fixed in the header for easier access.

If your app displays a header section below the main header, then it
will follow the defined behavior of the main header.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/54decf55-366w_Header_TouchEnvironment1-1.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_TouchEnvironment1 (1)

   366w\_Header\_TouchEnvironment1 (1)

The header can be brought back into view by:

-  scrolling up on the content

-  tapping or interacting with the content.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/a3cd80c6-366w_Header_TouchEnvironment2-2.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_TouchEnvironment2 (2)

   366w\_Header\_TouchEnvironment2 (2)

Fixed and transparent
---------------------

The header will be available at all times and have a transparency of
80-90%. This type of header can be useful if you don’t want it to be the
focus of attention, but still available if the user wishes to have
quicker access to a view or action.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/665d0605-366w_Header_HeaderFixedTransparent.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_HeaderFixedTransparent

   366w\_Header\_HeaderFixedTransparent

Multi-panel layout
------------------

If your app is presented in a multi-panel layout, then the headers that
appears in each panel will remain fixed and always visible when
scrolling.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/03b1c161-750w_Header_TouchMultiPanelView1-1.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_TouchMultiPanelView1 (1)

   750w\_Header\_TouchMultiPanelView1 (1)

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/b4b4d221-750w_Header_TouchMultiPanelView2-1.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_TouchMultiPanelView2 (1)

   750w\_Header\_TouchMultiPanelView2 (1)

**Overwritten fixed header**

If you choose to overwrite the default header, then it should:

-  react with its associated panel

-  not affect other panels.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/30d7a000-750w_Header_OverwrittenFixedheader1-1.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_OverwrittenFixedheader1 (1)

   750w\_Header\_OverwrittenFixedheader1 (1)

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/46f5aaf1-750w_Header_OverwrittenFixedheader2-1.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_OverwrittenFixedheader2 (1)

   750w\_Header\_OverwrittenFixedheader2 (1)

Hidden
------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/012020a0-366w_Header_HeaderHidden.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_HeaderHidden

   366w\_Header\_HeaderHidden

Overlay
-------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/665d0605-366w_Header_HeaderFixedTransparent.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_HeaderFixedTransparent

   366w\_Header\_HeaderFixedTransparent

The header is not visible to the user. This type of header is useful for
full-screen applications, such as the Camera app.

Useful in displaying more content in a single screen.

Apps without a header
---------------------

If you choose not to have a header then think about how users will
navigate through your UI in a different way.

Overview
--------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/90d79b0a-366w_Header_HeaderCustumised1.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_HeaderCustumised1

   366w\_Header\_HeaderCustumised1

Top level
---------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/beb45276-366w_Header_HeaderCustumised2.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_HeaderCustumised2

   366w\_Header\_HeaderCustumised2

For example, the Clock app has a customized header and uses icons at the
top of the screen to take the user to different modes of the app.

Header section
--------------

The header section allow users to easily shift between category views
within the same page. It has the same visibility as the main header. For
example, if the header is set to default it will slide away with the
sections when the user scrolls down.

+------+--------+
| |no  | The    |
| alt  | `Secti |
| text | on     |
| |    | API <. |
|      | ./../a |
|      | pi-qml |
|      | -curre |
|      | nt/Ubu |
|      | ntu.Co |
|      | mponen |
|      | ts.Sec |
|      | tions. |
|      | md>`__ |
|      | displa |
|      | ys     |
|      | a list |
|      | of     |
|      | sectio |
|      | ns     |
|      | that   |
|      | the    |
|      | user   |
|      | can    |
|      | select |
|      | .      |
|      | It is  |
|      | strong |
|      | ly     |
|      | recomm |
|      | ended  |
|      | to     |
|      | limit  |
|      | the    |
|      | number |
|      | of     |
|      | sectio |
|      | ns     |
|      | to two |
|      | or     |
|      | three  |
|      | to     |
|      | avoid  |
|      | a      |
|      | cultur |
|      | ed     |
|      | lookin |
|      | g      |
|      | header |
|      | .      |
+======+========+
+------+--------+

Dekko app
---------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/87bb9446-366w_Header_ActionInHeader1-6.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_ActionInHeader1 (6)

   366w\_Header\_ActionInHeader1 (6)

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/c7289222-366w_Header_ActionInHeader2-2.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_ActionInHeader2 (2)

   366w\_Header\_ActionInHeader2 (2)

For example, if your app was presenting an inbox of emails, from ‘All’,
the sub-sections could display ‘Recent’ and ‘Archive’ to further filter
the content. More sections on the screen can be visible by swiping
right.

When a mouse is attached
------------------------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/d9100a09-750w_Header_Pointer-environment.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_Pointer environment

   750w\_Header\_Pointer environment

More tabs are indicated by an arrow revealed when the user interacts
with the header section using a mouse.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/3d853bd3-750w_Header_HeaderSection.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_HeaderSection

   750w\_Header\_HeaderSection

1. **The main header** is a separate component that can hold actions and
   navigational options

2. **The header section** sits below the main header and allows for
   sub-navigation or filtering within the screen, which is indicated by
   the header above. One option is always selected

Best practices
--------------

Header section
--------------

|366w\_Header\_ClearHeader1 (1)| |do\_32|

Do
--

Make your sections clear and concise.

|366w\_Header\_ClearHeader2 (2)| |dont\_32|

Don’t
-----

The header section can look cluttered if you make the titles too big.

Actions
-------

Allow users quick access to the most important actions by placing them
inside the header. For example, in the Contact app: ‘Call’ and ‘Add
Contact’ are available in the header to give quick access to the Dialler
and Address book.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/50dcda9a-366w_Header_ClearHeaderAction-1.png
   :alt: 366w\_Header\_ClearHeaderAction (1)

   366w\_Header\_ClearHeaderAction (1)

.. |no alt text| image:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/608696e3-developer_links.png
.. |no alt text| image:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/e9f11635-information-link.png
.. |Header\_SlotArrangement4 (3)| image:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/a2a5f31e-Header_SlotArrangement4-3.png
.. |Header\_SlotArrangement5 (2)| image:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/28d29fbc-Header_SlotArrangement5-2.png
.. |no alt text| image:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/75f60d24-link_external.png
.. |no alt text| image:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/608696e3-developer_links.png
.. |no alt text| image:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/e9f11635-information-link.png
.. |no alt text| image:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/608696e3-developer_links.png
.. |366w\_Header\_ClearHeader1 (1)| image:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/4a88eac0-366w_Header_ClearHeader1-1.png
.. |do\_32| image:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/74c13c17-do_32+%281%29.png
.. |366w\_Header\_ClearHeader2 (2)| image:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/9beb16cf-366w_Header_ClearHeader2-2.png
.. |dont\_32| image:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/01fb853b-dont_32.png

