Navigation
==========

Consistent and effortless navigation is an essential element of the
overall user experience. |750w\_Navigation\_MainImage (2)|

-  `Usage › <#usage>`__

-  `Structure › <#structure>`__

-  `Components › <#components>`__

Usage
-----

Before building your application think about the overall structure and
organize the content considering the device layout and navigation that
will need to happen.

Grouping content
----------------

Categorizing content and elements into related groups will allow the
user to easily scan and perform actions within your application in a way
that is logical.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/3d5e1917-366w_Navigation_GroupingContent-2.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigation\_GroupingContent (2)

   366w\_Navigation\_GroupingContent (2)

Signposting
-----------

Signposts are recurring UI elements that help indicate to the user of
where they can go to reach their goal within your app. Using the same
elements throughout your interface will create a familiar environment
for the user and minimise their learning curve.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/f759cb96-366w_Navigation_SignPosting.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigation\_SignPosting

   366w\_Navigation\_SignPosting

Structure
---------

Structure your app by organizing the content into a logical hierarchy.

1. **Overview** – the most accessible features you want the user to have
   instant access to, such as a list of emails.

2. **Top level** – filters of the overview, such as threads or recent
   emails.

3. **Lower level** – detailed views that show detailed information, such
   as contact information.

4. **App settings** – a place for the settings of your app, such as
   notification settings for receiving emails.

Overview – Dialer
-----------------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/d6f20a80-366w_Navigation_UserJoureny2-2.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigation\_UserJoureny2 (2)

   366w\_Navigation\_UserJoureny2 (2)

Top level – Contacts
--------------------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/fc0e39db-366w_Navigation_UserJourney1-1.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigation\_UserJourney1 (1)

   366w\_Navigation\_UserJourney1 (1)

Lower detailed level – Contact information
------------------------------------------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/ba9bb1af-366w_navigation_UserJourney3-2.png
   :alt: 366w\_navigation\_UserJourney3 (2)

   366w\_navigation\_UserJourney3 (2)

Page stack
----------

A typical structure may consist of one or more top level views, with
detailed views on a lower level. Page stack navigation allows user to
drill down from the top level to the detailed views through actions and
navigational options within your UI.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/5bc13244-750w_Navigation_PageStack_HowItWorks-4.png
   :alt: 750w\_Navigation\_PageStack\_HowItWorks (4)

   750w\_Navigation\_PageStack\_HowItWorks (4)

On mobile devices, only one page is available at once. Once a page is
chosen, the page will stack over the previous page. A Back Button will
appear in the header to take the user back to the previous page if they
wish.

Page stack in a multi-panel layout
----------------------------------

Larger screens provide more screen estate for two or more panels to be
visible at once. There are two ways page stack behaves depending on
which panel the action is placed in.

Page stack over both panels
---------------------------

If an action is triggered in the leftmost panel, then the page will
takeover all panels.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/b09027c1-750w_Navigation_PageStackWithTwoPanelView-3.png
   :alt: 750w\_Navigation\_PageStackWithTwoPanelView (3)

   750w\_Navigation\_PageStackWithTwoPanelView (3)

Page stack over the right hand panel
------------------------------------

If an action is triggered in the rightmost panel, then the page will
stack over the same panel.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/55f5860f-750w_Navigation_PageStackWithJustRightPanelView-2.png
   :alt: 750w\_Navigation\_PageStackWithJustRightPanelView (2)

   750w\_Navigation\_PageStackWithJustRightPanelView (2)

System Settings – right panel view change
-----------------------------------------

In this example, ‘Brightness & Display’ has been selected inside the
left panel and takes over the rightmost panel view.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/a2fcbf6d-750w_Navigation_SecondPanelView-1.png
   :alt: 750w\_Navigation\_SecondPanelView (1)

   750w\_Navigation\_SecondPanelView (1)

Components
----------

The Ubuntu toolkit provides a variety of components that can provide
navigation within your application.

Header
------

Use the header to contain the most important actions and navigational
options inside your app. This allows the user to know where they are and
what they can do.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/54aa29cc-750w_Navigation_Header-3.png
   :alt: 750w\_Navigation\_Header (3)

   750w\_Navigation\_Header (3)

Slot arrangement
----------------

The header features a maximum of four slots that can be arranged and
combined to fulfills the user needs.

Slot Navigational option

A

-  **Back – **\ use to navigate to a previous page of the app (if other
   pages are available)

-  **Navigation drawer – **\ use to store more pages if there is no room
   in the header

B

-  **Title (mandatory) – **\ provide a one line title of the app or view

-  **Subtitle (optional) – ** extra explanatory text up to two lines

C/D

-  **Search – **\ use to search for specific content

-  **Settings – **\ use to navigate to your app’s settings page

Use drawers sparingly because it:

-  Hides pages and actions from the user

-  Conflicts with the Back Button

-  Requires a tap to see available pages/or actions and two taps every
   time a user switches pages.

+------+--------+
| |no  | A Back |
| alt  | Button |
| text | would  |
| |    | be     |
|      | irrele |
|      | vant   |
|      | if     |
|      | your   |
|      | app    |
|      | only   |
|      | has    |
|      | one    |
|      | page,  |
|      | becaus |
|      | e      |
|      | there  |
|      | would  |
|      | be no  |
|      | pages  |
|      | to go  |
|      | back   |
|      | from;  |
|      | so it  |
|      | is not |
|      | requir |
|      | ed.    |
+======+========+
+------+--------+

Headers in multi-panel layout
-----------------------------

For a multi-panel layout, such as on a desktop, each panel can display
its own header, which can contain additional slots because more real
estate is presented. This can be useful to reveal actions or views that
were previously hidden in drawers in a single panels screen, like on
mobile.

More actions revealed
---------------------

In this example, Dekko displays an action for the bottom edge, search
and settings inside the lefthand panel, and in the rightmost panel it
shows a delete, favourite and messaging.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/e8593d86-750w_Navigation_ConvergentHeader3actions-2.png
   :alt: 750w\_Navigation\_ConvergentHeader3actions (2)

   750w\_Navigation\_ConvergentHeader3actions (2)

+-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| |no alt text|   | `For more slot layout examples see Header <../building-blocks/header.md>`__   |
+=================+===============================================================================+
+-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Header appearance
-----------------

You can decide how you want the the header to appear in four ways:
Fixed, Fixed and Opaque, Fixed and Transparent, Hidden.

Fixed (default)
---------------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/5e0c2524-366w_Navigation_HeaderFixed-1.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigation\_HeaderFixed (1)

   366w\_Navigation\_HeaderFixed (1)

Useful for making section or action always accessible for when the user
scrolls.

Transparent
-----------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/c0844792-366w_Navigation_HeaderTransparent-1.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigation\_HeaderTransparent (1)

   366w\_Navigation\_HeaderTransparent (1)

Useful if you don’t want the header to be the focus of attention, but
want it readerly available if the user needs it.

Hidden
------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/f2a9d47e-366w_Navigation_HeaderHidden-1.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigation\_HeaderHidden (1)

   366w\_Navigation\_HeaderHidden (1)

Useful for full-screen applications, such as the Camera App.

Overlay
-------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/b7fa2ab0-366w_Navigtaion_HeaderOverlay.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigtaion\_HeaderOverlay

   366w\_Navigtaion\_HeaderOverlay

Useful to display more content in a single screen.

Customised header
-----------------

If you choose not to have a header, then think of how users will
navigate through your UI in a different way.

Overview
--------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/beb45276-366w_Navigation_HeaderCustumised1-1.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigation\_HeaderCustumised1 (1)

   366w\_Navigation\_HeaderCustumised1 (1)

Top level
---------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/90d79b0a-366w_Navigation_HeaderCustumised2-2.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigation\_HeaderCustumised2 (2)

   366w\_Navigation\_HeaderCustumised2 (2)

For example, the Clock app has a customized header where it uses icons
at the top of the screen to take the user to different levels of the
app.

Header sections
---------------

The header section allows users to easily shift between categories views
within the same page. If the main header is set to default, then the
sections will slide away when the user scrolls down.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/3d853bd3-750w_Navigation_HeaderSection-3.png
   :alt: 750w\_Navigation\_HeaderSection (3)

   750w\_Navigation\_HeaderSection (3)

1. **The main header** is a separate component that can hold actions and
   navigational options.

2. **The header section** sits below the main header and allows for
   sub-navigation or filtering within the screen indicated by the header
   above. One option is always selected.

Dekko app
---------

For example, if your app was presenting an inbox of emails, from ‘All’,
the sub-sections could display ‘Recent’ and ‘Archive’ to further filter
the content for the user. More section on the screen can be visible
through swipe or clicking the hint that appears when a mouse is
attached.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/2f59f039-366w_Navigation_Tabs-2.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigation\_Tabs (2)

   366w\_Navigation\_Tabs (2)

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/e97e38a5-366w_Navigation_TabsRecent-2.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigation\_TabsRecent (2)

   366w\_Navigation\_TabsRecent (2)

Pointer environment
-------------------

More tabs are indicated by an arrow revealed when the pointer hovers
over it.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/d9100a09-750w_Header_Pointer-environment.png
   :alt: 750w\_Header\_Pointer environment

   750w\_Header\_Pointer environment

Search in the main header
-------------------------

You can use search within the main header for an additional filter for
your application; or as a global search. Search is invoked in a similar
way in a touch and pointer environment by tapping or clicking on the
search icon.

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/288521f2-750w_Navigation_HeaderSearchV2-3.png
   :alt: 750w\_Navigation\_HeaderSearchV2 (3)

   750w\_Navigation\_HeaderSearchV2 (3)

Multi-panel layout
------------------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/44a9de6b-750w_Navigation_Convergence-search.png
   :alt: 750w\_Navigation\_Convergence search

   750w\_Navigation\_Convergence search

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/65192f75-750w_Navigation_Convergence-search-box.png
   :alt: 750w\_Navigation\_Convergence search box

   750w\_Navigation\_Convergence search box

Bottom edge
-----------

The bottom edge is specific to your application. It can give users quick
access to the most important actions within your app, or a related view
from the bottom of the screen via a hint (on touch), or from an action
inside the header (pointer).

When the bottom edge is revealed the page stacks over the previous page
and a chevron pointing down appears in the header to allow the user to
go back to the previous page.

Hint 1
------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/1a754799-366w_Navigation_BottomEdge1.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigation\_BottomEdge1

   366w\_Navigation\_BottomEdge1

Appears on application launch to hint to the user that there is a bottom
edge available.

Hint 2
------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/7d755a73-366w_Navigation_BottomEdge2.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigation\_BottomEdge2

   366w\_Navigation\_BottomEdge2

The bar is revealed after Hint 1 has been interacted with.

Reveal
------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/408eeee7-366w_Navigation_BottomEdge4-1.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigation\_BottomEdge4

   366w\_Navigation\_BottomEdge4

Once the user starts to swipe up from the hint. The new view starts to
be revealed.

New view
--------

.. figure:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/408eeee7-366w_Navigation_BottomEdge4.png
   :alt: 366w\_Navigation\_BottomEdge4

   366w\_Navigation\_BottomEdge4

A new view stacks over the previous page once the user has committed to
the swipe.

.. |750w\_Navigation\_MainImage (2)| image:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/043ba3b0-750w_Navigation_MainImage-2.png
.. |no alt text| image:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/e9f11635-information-link.png
.. |no alt text| image:: https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/75f60d24-link_external.png

